DUE 04 MAR 2020

Email solutions, in plain text format (.txt file), to wesix@smcm.edu

Read Chapter 1 of the OpenGL Superbible v4.  (you should figure out how
to run the demo code too.  Email me if you need help)
The answers are all directly from the book.  Read all of Chapter 1
of the book.  You can literally read the first question, read the book
until you find it, write in your answer, read the next question, read
the book until you find it.

1) (5 points)  What are the three dimensions of measurement?

2) (5 points) Nearby objects appear larger than further away objects.  This
perspective effect is called what?

3) (5 points) What is the act of taking a geometric description of a three-dimensional
object and turning it into an image of that object onscreen?

4) (10 points) What is the name of the concept where front faces of an object obscure
the back of the object from view?

5) (10 points) Achieving a high level of realism with nothing buth thousands or missions of
tiny lit and shaded polygons is a metter of brute force and a lot of hard
work.  What clever techique allows you to use a simpler geometry but achieves
a high level of realism?

6) (5 points) What is the combination of colors or objects on the screen?

7) (5 points) What is the name of the technique which smoothes out "jaggies"?

8) (5 points) What is the name of the non-real-time 3D effect used to render
frames, such as for movies like Toy Story and Shrek?

9) (5 points) What is the state of the art in real-time computer graphics?
(it was true in 2007 and mostly true today)

10) (5 points) What is the origin of a Cartesion coordinate system in 2D

11) (5 points) What is a primitive?

12) (10 points) "The first concept you really need to understand is call projection".
What is projection?

13) (5 points) What is the viewing volume?

14) (10 points) For orthographic projections, what are the six names that define
the edges of the rectangular prism?

15) (10 points) What is the name of the other type of projection?
